# MAD Transactions: Mutual Assured Destruction Transactions
An attempt at better zero confirmation transactions in a full-RBF world.
Introduction
Zero confirmation transactions have been a controversial subject in bitcoin since its beginings and they have come back to this status recently with the last Bitcoin Core client release. The Bitcoin Core latest version, 24.0.1, has a new configuration, mempoolfullrbf, wich allows the node to relay double spend transactions for any transaction present in the mempool, even non-signaling replace-by-fee (RBF) transactions. This policy is known as full-RBF and the default option is still set as non-activated. Is almost a consensus that, because in the future miners’ revenue will only rely on fees, the natural mempool policy will be full-RBF. But the specific time when this change should occur is still a matter of debate. Many businesses in bitcoin, to this day, still rely on zero confirmation transactions, so this change could have a great impact for bitcoin users.

Proposal
If there is consensus that full-RBF policy is inevitable, why not use it as a way to improve zero confirmation transactions?

How to do it?

Since in full-RBF any double spend will be “allowed” in the mempool, let’s make double spends even easier and build transactions that can be double spend by the two parties. We can achieve this using a modified version of a PayJoin transaction (aka P2EP transaction). PayJoin transactions aggregate UTXOs from merchant and customer with the goal of breaking common-input-ownership heuristic. These are the steps to build a MAD transaction:

Merchant sends an UTXO that he controls to the customer together with his address.
The customer creates a partially signed PayJoin transaction and also creates a transaction using merchant’s input and his UTXOs that must have, in aggregate, at least twice the value of the good being purchased. If the number of UTXOs in the set is equal to one then the customer signs the input using SIGHASH_SINGLE flag together with the ouput to his change address receiving all the value of his UTXO minus two times the value of the good. If the number of UTXOs in the set is greater than one then a single input is signed with SIGHASH_SINGLE flag with the corresponding output and all the other inputs are signed using SIGHASH_NONE flag. At least one of the UTXOs must be present in both partially signed transactions. Customer then sends the two transactions back to the merchant.
Merchant signs the PayJoin transaction and broadcasts it and keeps the partial signed transaction to himself.
Now let’s see how this configuration can minimize trust in zero confirmation transactions. Because the customer has complete control over his UTXOs he can double spend them, but if he tries it as soon as the merchant sees a double spend of the PayJoin transaction in the mempool, the merchant can immediately broadcast the partial signed transaction with a slightly higher fee, which will be funded by the customer’s UTXO set.

When customer sees the merchant’s double spend he can try the same strategy increasing the fee so his new double spend transaction will be the one to be mined. It is easy to realize that this bid war will progress until the merchant has used the complete value of the customer’s UTXO for the fee and independently of who’s transaction has been mined we will reach the following scenario.

The merchant will be deprived of his product which values P bitcoins, and the customer will have the good but will lose at least twice the value in bitcoins, so he will end up losing P bitcoins in total. This scenario will happen regardless of who tries to cheat, if the merchant tries to charge more than what was agreed upon, the customer can start the process and the final state will be the same. Because we made possible for the two parties to double spend the PayJoin transaction using double the value of the good, we have created a mutual assured destruction (MAD) situation that prevents any party from deviating from equilibrium which is: do not double spend! Doing so can only lead to losses, for both sides.

The MAD situation is inescapable if someone deviates from agreement, so from the implementation point of view one single double spend transaction can be produce to save time and to deterrent the double spend, that transaction will consume twice the value of the good as fee using the partial signed transaction. This transaction is called: nuclear transaction.

Since the nuclear transaction will be deployed whenever the PayJoin transaction is double spent this could be problematic in a fee spike situation where the transaction get stuck in the mempool and any legitimate RBF attempt will be seen as double spend. To circumvent this problem the second step in the protocol could include to sign one or two more PayJoin transactions with higher fees that will not be seen as double spends in the case they are used in the fee spike situation.

Security
In which ways can this design go wrong? The critical part is the possibility of response from any side that faces a double spend and this possibility can be nullified if the attacker can hide his double spend transaction from the victim. The only way to do this is sending his transaction directly to a mining pool that must keep it private. Is there any incentive for the mining pool to keep the transaction private? No. Actually, if the mining pool has λ percentage of the hashrate, on average, the expected return that the mining pool will get exposing the double spend and then triggering the nuclear transaction is twice the price of the good times λ.

So, if the customer wants to execute a double spend, he has to share the profit with the mining pool, where the value has to be at least what the mining pool would get exposing the double spend. Let’s try to analize it:

P = Good’s price in bitcoins.
x = How many times the customer’s UTXO set spendable by the merchant will be equivalent to P.
λ = Mining pool percentage share of the network hashrate.
The expected value the mining pool gets exposing the double spend is xλP, and the value the customer gets in the double spend is (1-xλ)P. The double spend ceases to be profitable for the customer when (1-xλ)P equals zero, that happens when xλ=1. We can see that in a situation where the mining pool controls half of the hashing power, using a UTXO set containing twice the value of the good would already be enough. But that indicates the smaller the percentage the mining pool controls the larger has to be the value aggregated in the UTXO set. How to solve this problem? Enters spy mining.

Originally spy mining is used by mining pools to accelerate the mining process generating empty blocks only with the coinbase transaction. But with the implementation of MAD transactions spy mining could also be used to monitor if double spends are being tried by rival mining pools. The expected value a pool can get mining the original PayJoin transaction is λ times the transaction fee, but if the mining pool spies a rival mining pool and sees a double spend, publicly revealing the double spend transaction will trigger the nuclear transaction and generate λxP in expected value. So, mining pools will be incentivized to snitch others mining pools as long as the fee rate is lower than xP. Considering that x is at least 2 and hardly someone will purchase something that is cheaper than the fee rate using on chain transaction, is safe to say that this condition is usually satisfied.

In a world where full-RBF is activated, zero confirmation transactions are very insecure and miners will be incentivized to mine double spends with higher fees, but in a world where full-RBF is activated and MAD transactions are implemented miners are incentivized to denounce double spends enforcing the security of zero confirmation transactions.

One possible rule for the implementation is not accepting partial signed transactions where the UTXOs have not been confirmed. Accepting partial signed transactions with unconfirmed UTXOs can open the possibility for “child attacks” where the customer could make many purchases where the outputs of an unconfirmed PayJoin transaction could be used as input for another PayJoin transaction and so on. The customer could execute a double spend against the first transaction, although the nuclear transaction will be triggered, if the total price of goods bought is higher than twice the price of the first good than the attack will be successful since the other merchants will be oblivious to the attack and unable to respond.

Lightning Comparison
The lightning network is a Bitcoin’s second layer technology that aspires to scale the bitcoin network with instant off-chain transactions. How MAD transactions can compare to the lightning network regarding instant transactions?

1. Speed
Both methods are instantaneous although the settlement period is totally different. MAD transactions are settled exactly as regular transactions, on the other hand lightning transactions are “never” settled on the main chain, only the closing channel transaction is settled on the main chain. In this regard the concept of settlement for lightning transactions is more dubious.

Because the time of settlement for MAD transactions is the same as for regular transactions, the nuclear transaction that guarantees the zero confirmation enforcement need to be kept for the same time as a regular transaction is considered settled. In Bitcoin usually this time is 6 confirmations, but it could variate depending on implementation. In the lightning network the settlement on the main chain only happens when the channel is closed, and there is no limit for that period. So the revocation keys that are used to apply the penalty transaction must be kept as long as the channel is active. This is seen as a mild inconvenience.

2. Security
Both methods use game theory to guarantee their functionality. MAD transactions achieve enforcement through a threat of mutual loss for both sides of the transaction. The lightning network achieves this through penalty transactions that clean the channels balance completely in favor of the victim of the attack, when the other party tries to broadcast older states. But because the “justice system” in lightning is not symmetrical, sometimes it can produce injustice. The penalty could be executed not only in response of an attack but actually due to mistakes as broadcasting old states recorded in back ups or other bugs in the lightning software. In MAD transactions there is no possibility such mistake could occur once only legitimate double spends will trigger nuclear transactions. Is necessary conscious will to create the double spends. Once the transaction is confirmed, nuclear transactions become completely harmless.

Although the lightning network is more complicated and demands more caution overall it is more secure than MAD transactions. The game theory behind MAD transactions could be pretty solid but they still are zero confirmation transactions. We saw that mining pools will be incentivized to protect MAD transactions, but only because of spy mining. If one of the parties of a MAD transaction is a miner that can mine a double spend completely in secret, MAD transactions could offer no protection. Such probability is very low since the expected return for the miner is λP, which may not worth the risk, but is still not null.

3. Liquidity
Usually this is considered the Achilles’ heel of the lightning network. In order to participate in the lightning network is necessary to open channels to other peers and that process will freeze funds in this channel for the entirety of the channels duration which incurs in an opportunity cost for these funds. And that is only for establishing outbound liquidity required to send payments, but to get inbound liquidity many methods are available like submarine swaps or paying for inbound liquidity.

In MAD transactions the situation is much simpler, the amount of funds that get locked in nuclear transactions is equal to the price of the good been purchased and the period of time is until the transaction is settled, which can vary from one to usually six confirmations depending on implementation, but this time is necessary only if the customer is performing another zero confirmation transaction before the previous one being confirmed. Otherwise the funds in the PayJoin transaction are right away ready for use in regular transactions.

4. Privacy
Privacy in lightning network is clearly better if compared to regular transactions on the main chain. Just the fact that lightning transactions occur off-chain and they use onion routing is an improvement over the main chain privacy. The deployment of taproot will increase privacy for lightning once open and cooperative closing channels will be indistinguishable from any other taproot transaction.

MAD transactions also offer an improvement in privacy since they break the common-input-ownership heuristic and if used widely could improve privacy for the whole Bitcoin network. Is worth to note that trying to double spend MAD transactions will trigger the nuclear transaction that not only generates losses for both sides also reveals the ownership of the inputs due to the SIGHASH flags creating another incentive to not double spend.


Table comparing LN and MADtx
Conclusion
Will MAD transactions make zero confirmation transactions completely trustless? No. Zero confirmation transactions still are a second class citizen and will probably never be as secure as confirmed transactions. But MAD transactions try to give some trustlessness to zero confirmation transactions using a bit of game theory.

So summarizing, MAD transactions (actually a protocol) are composed by two transactions, a regular PayJoin transaction and a called nuclear transaction that is supposed not to be used. The nuclear transaction provides the ability for the two parties in the exchange double spend the PayJoin transaction leading to a situation of mutual assured destruction (MAD) which prevents the double spend. The down side compared to regular transactions is the fact that the protocol is interactive, but is hard to think in scenarios where the two parties would not be online using a zero confirmation transaction. In this way MAD transactions attempt to improve privacy and trust in zero confirmation transactions with a Bitcoin protocol that embraces full-RBF.
